Added user guide for infra provisioners (#3682)
conveyordata/data-product-portal: docs/docs/developer-guide/provisioner.md

# How to use the provisioner SDK

The Data Product Portal SDK includes a Kubernetes-operator-style **reconcile loop** that
lets you build provisioners — services that react to portal events and converge real
infrastructure (S3 buckets, database schemas, Terraform workspaces, …) towards the
desired state declared in the portal.

This guide walks you through the core concepts, then shows you how to build and run your
own provisioner using the bundled example as a reference.

---

## How it works

When a resource (exploration, data product, output port, …) is created, updated, or
deleted in the portal, the portal fires a **CloudEvent** webhook. The reconcile manager
receives the event and triggers the reconcile of your provisioner. Your provisioner needs

> to implement the reconcile method in general it follows this pattern:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to implement the reconcile method in general so that it follows this pattern:
```

> - Fetch current state from portal and infra

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fetch current state from portal and infrastructure
```

> - Compare the portal state and infra state with desired state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Compare the portal state and infrastructure state with desired state
```

> - Make changes to infra and/or portal to match desired state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Make changes to infrastructure and/or portal to match desired state
```

> This **level-based** approach has a couple of important properties:

Reviewer 2: I am not sure what is ment with a level-based approach

Author: Yeah something made up by AI which I didn't think about.

Alternative:

```suggestion
This **resource based reconciler** approach has a couple of important properties:
```

Reviewer 2: Resource based reconciler is more clear, thanks 😄

                                                      │
                                              enqueues resource id
                                                      │
                                              ReconcileManager (workers)
                                                      │
                                          Your Reconciler.reconcile()
                                                      │
                                     compare current vs desired state and make updates
```

---

## Key SDK components

### `Reconciler`

The abstract base class you implement. It exposes two methods:

| Method                    | Purpose                                                                                                                                        |
|---------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `reconcile(resource_id)`  | Called for each resource that needs to be reconciled. Raise an exception to signal failure; the framework will retry with exponential backoff. |

> | `list_ids()` *(optional)* | Called once on startup to return all existing resource IDs so every resource is reconciled before any webhook event arrives.                   |

Reviewer: This is not clear to me:
- do we list the ids in portal? or do we list the ids in our infra state?
- do we also have to trigger the reconciliation or does it happen behind the scenes?

Author: So it should be the `resource_id` use in the reconciler that is returned, this also ensure your `reconcile` is called for every resource.

```suggestion
| `list_ids()` *(optional)* | Called once on startup, you should return all the existing ID's of resources in Portal for which you want to call the `reconcile(resource_id)`. |
```

We currently support 2 resources:

> - Data Product: For Data product your reconcile function will be triggered on changes to the data product itself, it's Output Ports, Technical Assets, Technical Asset Output Port links, Input ports, Role assignments etc

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Data Product: Your reconcile function will be triggered on changes to the Data Product itself, its Output Ports, Technical Assets, Technical Asset Output Port links, Input Ports, Role Assignments etc.
```

> - Exploration: For Exploration your reconcile function will be triggered on changes to the exploration itself, and it's Input Ports

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Exploration: Your reconcile function will be triggered on changes to the Exploration itself, and its Input Ports.
```

        )
        self._provision(resource_id, response)

    async def list_ids(self) -> Iterable[UUID]:
        response = await get_explorations.asyncio(client=self._client)
        if isinstance(response, GetExplorationsResponse):
            return [e.id for e in response.explorations]
        return []

    def _provision(self, resource_id: UUID, exploration: GetExplorationResponse) -> None:
        # Create or update your real infrastructure here.
        ...

    def _deprovision(self, resource_id: UUID) -> None:
        # Tear down the infrastructure here.
        ...
```

#### 2.1 Level-based reconciliation

`reconcile` is called with only the resource ID. It must re-fetch the current desired
state from the portal itself and converge infrastructure towards it. This makes
reconciliation **idempotent**: running it twice produces the same result, and coalesced
events (e.g. three rapid updates) result in a single infrastructure call.

If `reconcile` raises an exception the framework automatically retries it with
exponential backoff, so transient API failures or flaky infrastructure are handled
for you without any extra code.

#### 2.2 Finalizers

> Finalizers let your provisioner block the portal from hard-deleting a resource until

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Finalizers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/finalizers/) let your provisioner block the portal from hard-deleting a resource until
```

async def healthz() -> dict[str, str]:
    return {"status": "ok"}
```

---

## Running the provisioner

### Environment variables

| Variable | Required | Description |
|----------|----------|-------------|
| `PORTAL_BASE_URL` | Yes | Base URL of the portal API, e.g. `http://localhost:5050` |
| `PORTAL_*` auth vars | Depends | See the SDK README for authentication options |

### Start the server

```bash
PORTAL_BASE_URL="http://localhost:5050" \
  poetry run uvicorn my_provisioner:app --reload
```

Then configure the portal's webhook URL to point at your running provisioner:

```
http://localhost:8000/webhook
```

---

## Running the bundled example

The `sdk/example/` directory contains a complete, runnable provisioner that writes
per-exploration JSON manifests to disk (a stand-in for real infrastructure).

```bash
cd sdk
poetry install --all-groups

PORTAL_BASE_URL="http://localhost:5050" \
PROVISIONER_WORKSPACE="./.workspace" \
  poetry run uvicorn example.provisioner:app --reload
```

Create, update, or delete an exploration in the portal and watch manifests appear and
disappear under `.workspace/`. Use this as a starting point for your own provisioner.

---

## FAQ

> ### How should I handle input port and technical asset changes?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### How should I handle Input Port and Technical Asset changes?
```

When an input port is created or approved, the SDK enqueues a reconcile for the
**consuming** data product (or exploration). When a technical asset is added to or
removed from an output port, the SDK enqueues a reconcile for the **owning data

> product**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an Input Port is created or approved, the SDK enqueues a reconcile for the
**consuming** Data Product (or Exploration). When a Technical Asset is added to or
removed from an Output Port, the SDK enqueues a reconcile for the **owning Data
Product**.
```

We generally recommend the following pattern:

- **Output port created / updated** — provision a role (e.g. an IAM policy, a Postgres
  role, a Snowflake role) that grants access to the underlying assets encapsulated in the output port.
- **Input port created / approved** — assign that role to the consumer's principal.

> - **Input port removed / rejected** — revoke the role assignment from the consumer's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Output Port created / updated** — provision a role (e.g. an IAM policy, a Postgres
  role, a Snowflake role) that grants access to the underlying assets encapsulated in the Output Port.
- **Input Port created / approved** — assign that role to the consumer's principal.
- **Input Port removed / rejected** — revoke the role assignment from the consumer's
```
